Article Accessbility Tools (#273)
iodigital-com/io-technology: data/blog/accessibility-tools.md

---
title: 'Accessibility tools'
date: '2025-01-03'
tags: ['frontend', 'a11y', 'accessibility']

> images: ['/articles/accessibility-tools/a11y.png']

Reviewer: The image is cut off weirdly. I know this should be handled nicer by the CSS, but can you see if you can resolve it through an image with the right aspect ratio?

Author: Done!

> summary: 'When auditing your website for accessibility there are plenty of accessibility tools that can aid with this process.'

Reviewer: ```suggestion
summary: "When auditing your website for accessibility there are plenty of accessibility tools that can aid with this process. Let's have a look at some of these useful tools!"
```

Author: Done!

authors: ['ravindre-ramjiawan']
theme: 'blue'
---

## Table of Contents

<TOCInline toc={props.toc} exclude={["Table of Contents"]} toHeading={2} />

## Background

In the digital world, accessibility[^1] (often abbreviated as a11y) refers to designing and developing websites, applications, and digital content in a way that can be used by everyone,

> including people with disabilities. The goal of a11y is to create an inclusive digital environment where everyone has equal access to information and functionality,

Reviewer 2: I personally liked how mdn described WCAG:

> primarily for people with disabilities — but also for all user agents, including some highly limited devices or services, such as digital assistants.

As a11y often is confused to be only for 'blind people' or people with poor vision.. while its actually much broader. For example, there is also the cognitive accessibility which covers accessibility considerations for people with cognition and learning disabilities. 

The reason why I like to highlight this is that its often overlooked and it also is a nice bridge to why automating is hard (eg. automating the actual content on how easy it is to read is currently not possible and requires human attention). 

Maybe in general it is a good idea to include the mention of WCAG in this 'background' part, to lay out that when we refer to this accessibility in the digital world that we usually also mention the guidelines. Most tools actually report on a level of WCAG compliancy anyway, not to "accessiblity in general".

Author: Indeed done!

> regardless of their physical or cognitive abilities. According to WebAIM[^2] and their [2024 report](https://webaim.org/projects/million/) only a small fraction of websites are fully accessible.

Reviewer: Maybe mention a few common disabilities? Always good to remind people :)

Author: Done!

> ## Tools

Reviewer 2: This immediately starts talking about a11y specifications while not having it referenced it in the background. Also it mentioned the most common approach is some form of automated tools, is this for developers? Or designers? Or for PO's?

Author: Done! Mentioned in the Tools section.

There are multiple methods ways in checking if your website complies to a11y specifications. The most common approach is to use some form of automated tools. The browser for starters has its own
accessibility tools but also access to free to use browser extensions.

> ### Lighthouse

Reviewer: I think it might be nice to briefly mention the pros and cons of each of these tools

Author: Hmmm thats not really the goal of this article. Using all of them can be beneficial.

Chrome for example has the Lighthouse[^3] reporter tool in which you flag the accessibility category to get a audit on your website.

<figure>
  <img
  src="/articles/accessibility-tools/lighthouse-devtools.jpg"
  alt="Lighthouse Devtools" />
  <figcaption>Lighthouse Devtools</figcaption>
</figure>

Once Lighthouse has done a full inspection of the selected page it will output a report with everything that was checked by Lighthouse.
As can be seen Lighthouse creates small screenshots of elements that failed to comply to a certain rule and also reports additional items that can be checked manually.

<figure>
  <img
  src="/articles/accessibility-tools/lighthouse-report.jpg"
  alt="Lighthouse Report" />
  <figcaption>Lighthouse Report</figcaption>
</figure>

### Axe Devtools

> Axe Devtools[^4] is a browser extension that can catch up to [80% or more](https://accessibility.deque.com/hubfs/Semi-Automated-Accessibility-Testing-Coverage-Report.pdf) of accessibility issues.

Reviewer: It also has a package to use in automated tests, right? Might be good to mention that as well

Author: This is mentioned in the Test automation part. But also as a Pro feature.

Reviewer: To run Axe Devtools in your automated test runners you don't have to pay, right. As in this package https://www.npmjs.com/package/axe-core. You should be able to run that for free ;)

Author: Correct. In the part about test automation I mention it in the following sentence: 
`Integrated with plugins such as wick-a11y[^9], offer thorough accessibility checks using the axe-core engine`

It also has a paid subscription model in which you can automate entire user flows or perform checks using AI.

<figure>
  <img
  src="/articles/accessibility-tools/axe-devtools.jpg"
  alt="Axe Devtools" />
  <figcaption>Axe Devtools</figcaption>
</figure>

Once Axe Devtools has done a full inspection of the selected page it will output a report with everything that was checked by Axe Devtools.
As can be seen Axe Devtools reports issues in several categories and has a lot of settings that can be configured especially when using the paid versions.
Using the Highlight button will show you the element in question that is not compliant to a rule and explains why its not compliant and how to solve the issue.

<figure>
  <img
  src="/articles/accessibility-tools/axe-devtools-report.jpg"

>   alt="Axe Devtools Report" />

Reviewer: I think these alt texts (especially because it's an a11y article) could be a bit better in describing what you can see on the report

Author: Done!

  <figcaption>Axe Devtools Report</figcaption>
</figure>

<figure>
  <img
  src="/articles/accessibility-tools/axe-devtools-settings.jpg"
  alt="Axe Devtools Settings" />
  <figcaption>Axe Devtools Settings</figcaption>
</figure>

### Wave

WAVE (Web Accessibility Evaluation Tool)[^5] is another powerful tool designed to help developers and content creators make their web content more accessible to individuals with disabilities.

> It is developed by WebAIM (Web Accessibility In Mind). The tool provides visual feedback by injecting icons and indicators into your web page, highlighting potential accessibility issues.

Reviewer: Perhaps link to them

Author: I kind of already had a link to them in the background part. If its not clear let me know if I should switch to normal links instead of footnotes for sources.

highlighting potential accessibility issues. Accessibility Insights technically uses the axe-core[^7] engine under the hood.

<figure>
  <img
  src="/articles/accessibility-tools/accessibility-insights-devtools.jpg"
  alt="Accessibility Insights" />
  <figcaption>Accessibility Insights</figcaption>
</figure>

When clicking on the list view and filtering link it will open a new window with the reported issues.
Another cool feature here is that you can automatically create an issue in GitHub or Azure from this page.

<figure>
  <img
  src="/articles/accessibility-tools/accessibility-insights-report.jpg"
  alt="Accessibility Insights Report" />
  <figcaption>Accessibility Insights Report</figcaption>
</figure>

When switching to the quick assess option from the dropdown you land on the Assessment page.
In this page you have a nice overview about all the checks that were performed automatically but also a guided manual checklist for each category.

<figure>
  <img
  src="/articles/accessibility-tools/accessibility-insights-quick-assess.jpg"
  alt="Accessibility Insights Quick Assess" />
  <figcaption>Accessibility Insights Quick Assess</figcaption>
</figure>

### Test automation

> Using test automation for accessibility testing is beneficial for several reasons:

Reviewer 2: This sentence to me feels weird, lists reasons why it is beneficial to have test automation, but then, point 3 and 5 sort of reference an actual tool (vaguely) and just overall not really a list why it is beneficial it just feels.. like you wouldn't call these 'beneficial reasons' in my opinion. 

I think you can actually dumb it down to a normal paragraph and in a separate paragraph give a little bit more attention to the actual tools which can help you (test) automate a11y. 

eg. (this is just a quick blurp as an example/inspiration)

> Nowadays, just like code can be analysed for common mistakes we can also use tools to give us feedback on the output of our webpages. Existing tools like Cypress can use plugins such as wick-a11y to perform thorough accessibility checks using the axe-core engine. Another popular tool is Pa11y which scans for common issues and can generate the report in many outputs. 
> 
> Ultimately the tools are usually covering the easier to detect mistakes in our designs. A fully WCAG compliant website usually needs real humans to evaluate the pages as most tools just are not able to catch all parts laid out by the guidelines.

Author: Done! Rewritten.

<figure>
  <img
  src="/articles/accessibility-tools/cy-a11y.png"
  alt="Cypress - Accessibility audit report" />
  <figcaption>Cypress - Accessibility audit report</figcaption>
</figure>

While test automation offers numerous advantages, it's not a one-size-fits-all solution for accessibility.
Automated tools might not catch nuanced issues such as context-specific problems, user experience concerns, or the needs of individuals with diverse disabilities.
For example, while automation can check for color contrast, it might not ensure that color choices are aesthetically pleasing or culturally appropriate.
Similarly, automated tools can miss dynamic content changes, interactive elements, or custom widgets that require manual testing.

User feedback and manual testing are crucial components to complement automated tests.
Engaging real users, including those with disabilities, provides insights into practical usability and accessibility that automated tools alone cannot achieve.
Therefore, a balanced approach combining both automated and manual testing is essential to ensure a truly accessible and user-friendly experience.

## Conclusion

> I hope this provides a quick overview of the tooling that is available out there to enhance the accessibility of your web content.

Reviewer 2: Perhaps:
... of **some of** the tooling that is  ....

Author: Done!

Start with the low-hanging fruit that can be identified and addressed automatically using these tools.

> Additionally, take advantage of the guided checklists these tools offer to achieve your accessibility compliance goals effectively.

Reviewer 2: Nitpick, but: guided checklists? If there is no link to those, maybe consider leaving this out. Or ending on the note that testing with actual humans with disabilities is something that will always give you insights no other tool can provide.

Author: Yes I mentioned it briefly in Lighthouse and Accessbility Insights for example.
